---
layout: post
title: My Neovim setup and why I think you should give Neovim a try
draft: true
---

This is going to be my take on [Neovim][neovim]. In the past I made a lot of
attempts to switch to _good old editors from the time when everything just
worked and was quick_. It just never worked quite for me: vim is a pain to
configure and Emacs just have never been my thing. But this time I decided to go
for a different approach: Neovim configured entirely in Lua instead of VimScript
and it's just such a breeze. Also I discovered [Neovide][neovide], which is a
grea GUI for Neovim.

So let's get started with...

## ...Why not X?

Any sane person in this day and age would wonder, why would someone even choose
a clunky and outdated editor that traces it's roots back to the 1970s (both
original vi and Emacs were released in 1976). But rationalize this choice, we
need to explore the modern "text editors for coders" scene first.

I will not touch full-fledged IDEs like JetBrains products, Eclipse, etc. These
are great products. But they do have their own shortcomings: most of them are
notoriously slow, UI is not great sometimes (or at all times, to each their
own), sometimes they can be quite inflexible. Although I do miss the [Nyan Cat
progress bar][nyan].

With that ruled out, let's make a bold statement: LSP (Language-server protocol)
is the king these days if you want IDE-level functionality, but do not want to
touch these slow things. LSP allows you to hook up a single program per single
language into any editor you want to use, and it will give you code highlights,
basic refactoring, linting, formattings, etc. With that in mind, we will only
consider editors that have first-class LSP support, or there is a plugin that is
so widely accepted by the community, it makes it the _de facto_ standard.

A good example of why this is important: recently I started using [templ] for my
pet project. It is a great templating tool for Go, but to get a decent
development workflow you need to hook up its LSP to your code editor. There is
usually no support for it in major IDEs.

### Visual Studio Code

It is, in my opinion, the single greatest thing that happened to the world of
software development in the last decade. Don't get me wrong, it is not perfect.
There is no such thing as "perfect software". But it generally provides a decent
middle ground. If you want just a simple text editor, VS Code is reasonably
quick and comes with sane defaults. If you want an IDE-like functionality, you
can install a plugin that will automatically install and hook up an LSP for the
language you want. The plugins are super-easy install and VS Code has _a lot_ of
them.

Why not just use it? Well, it's funny. Once you cross a certain boundary, this
great editor, which is not very fast from the start (it's based on Electron
after all), it is starting to get slow. Like really slow. And you cannot really
customize the interface either: the layout is there and you have to live with
it. And this layout is really not all that great.

### Sublime Text

It is on the other end of spectrum of GUI-based text editors because of its
performance. It's really, _really_ fast. But it has it's drawbacks. The plugin
management always felt clunky to me, the UI is good, but it's probably _too_
minimalistic and you cannot really customize it either, which is made even worse
by the closed-source nature of this editor. Also the popularity of Sublime Text
seems to be fading away which means poorer plugins support.

But if you want something minimalistic to quickly edit smaller filed it is a
great editor really.

### Emacs

Just not my thing. That's it. That's the story. I tried to approach it many
times, including using [Doom Emacs][doom], but it was constantly breaking. The
UI story with Emacs is actually interesting. The first-class UI support is
actually good and you can achieve great things with it. I still think you can
achieve the greatest Markdown editing workflow with Emacs specifically because
of it: you can show embedded images, properly-sized headers, etc. But it have
never been great for other things in my experience. And I hate the necessity to
learn a very specific dialect of Lisp just for the purpose of configuring my
code editor. Sorry, Emacs lovers. I still believe it is a great editor though.

### Vim

I actually used it for quite a while and this is how I have gotten to use
Neovim. Vim is something, that just worked right for me. It's _properly_ quick.
It has a vibrant community and tons of plugins which allows you to build just
about anything out of it. But setting up LSPs have never been a great experience
for me. It was OK, but not great. Also, while VimScript is _bearable_ is not a
great language and I have found myself to constantly look up the most basic
things while configuring it.

### Novel text editors

[Helix][hx] and [Zed][zed] both have great ideas in the minds of their creators.
They offer a modern take on console-based and GUI-based editors respectively.
They are _really_ fast. Zed has first-class and fully-automatic LSP support. But
they are still very basic and don't have much plugins, so they are a pass for
now. But I am pretty sure both of them have a bright future ahead of them.

## How Neovim solves any of these?

First of all, in essence it's Vim. A deeply modified fork of it, to be precise.

Unlike the original Vim, Neovim has first-class support for Lua. This means that
you can avoid writing any VimScript in your configs and extensions entirely. On
the other hand, it can run any plugin written in VimScript, which means you have
access to the broader Vim community.

The good thing about Lua is that it is a really simple and fun language. I have
actually used it before in some obscure robotics platform and had a great time.
It's also really fast, which means it is a great language for embedded scripting
engines and it is widely used in that exact capacity. Neovim integrates Lua into
the Vim ecosystem quite nicely as well: basically it just exposes an API to
interact with the things you would normally do via VimScript.

Neovim has a lot of plugins written entirely in Lua and I feel like the
introduction of a general-purpose C-like language have attracted many great
developers.

If you don't fancy neither Lua nor VimScript, you can write plugins in any
language and communicate with Neovim via its client-server protocol.

And it has LSP support out of the box!

## The bad and the ugly

It is still Vim. This means it is a terminal-first editor and yout capabilities
are mostly limited to plain text. And I must admit that Emacs does a much better
job in that department. This also means that you will have to live with
mode-based editing. I actually like it, and I even use it in other editors as a
plugin, but many people don't.

It is also really barebones out of the box and you will have to do a lot of
configuration to make it look and behave nicely.

Speaking of configuration...

## Why not a configuration framework?

There are many of them. LazyVim, Doom Nvim, LunarVim, you name it. They have
several major problems for me:

- They are very opinionated and I have my own strong opinions.
- They are loaded with plugins which usually means they are going to be quite
  slow.
- Nothing comes close in terms of documentation compared to Doom Emacs, which is
  actually great.

With all of that out of the way, let's finally craft my perfect editor...
Kidding, there is no such thing as "perfect".

## Basic settings

Let's get started. Assuming you have already installed Neovim, run it by typing
`nvim` in your terminal or, if you are like me, start Neovide.

Before getting into plugins, let's figure out what we can do without touching
them. The first thing we are going to do is set up line numbers (by the way,
it's kind of funny that this is advertised as a "sane default" by Neovim devs).

Create the nvim configuration directory if it doesn't exist already:

    mkdir ~/.config/nvim

And open the `init.lua` file:

    :e ~/.config/nvim/init.lua

Now let's add some configuration:

```lua
vim.o.number = true
vim.wo.relativenumber = true
```

The second line enables relative numbers, that end up looking like this:

<!-- TODO relative numbers pic -->

This is really useful for using commands with motions. For example, if you you
want to delete the current line and 4 line before it, you just type `d4k`. The
convenience is that you immediately see the number required to do the motion.

In the next step we are going to make our experience slightly more pleasant and
highlight the currrent line at which our cursor is located:

```lua
vim.o.cursorline = true
```

The next thing I consider to be a sane default is to make the Vim clipboard
integrated with the OS clipboard. This allows you to Ctrl-C something from a
different program and paste in Vim and vice versa.

```lua
vim.o.clipboard = "unnamedplus"
```

Next, let's map the leader key. It is useful for separating your own custom
keybindings from what Neovim and plugins provide out of the box. I always set it
to spacebar, but you can set whatever you like more:

```lua
vim.g.mapleader = " "
```

Next, let's deal with the tabs. It is a surprisingly wide topic, but I use only
very basic settings:

```lua
-- automatically detect whether we should use tabs or spaces
vim.o.smarttab = true
-- display tabs as four space (the default is 8, which is too much to my space)
vim.o.shiftwidth = 4
```

I don't set up any additional settings like `tabstop`, `softtabstop` and
`expandtab`, but you can search and see if you need them.

The last settings we are going to touch here is `timeoutlen`. It specifies a
number of milliseconds after which things like the completion prompt are
revealed after you type and it is important for some plugins we are going to set
up later. I set it up to 200 ms, but you can figure out a comfortable number for
yourself.

```lua
vim.o.timeoutlen = 200
```

_A bonus bit_: sometimes the locale of your system is not what want you want to
see in Neovim, and that's why I explicitely set the interface language:

```lua
vim.cmd.language("en_US")
```

## GUI settings

If you are using some sort of Neovim GUI client like Neovide, you may want to
configure that as well. I only do two settings.

First, let's set the font family and its osze:

```lua
vim.o.guifont = "Iosevka:h14"
```

For Neovide, I disable the cursor animation for entering the command line
because it doesn't play well with the plugins I use:

```lua
if vim.g.neovide then
    vim.g.neovide_cursor_animate_command_line = false
end
```

After that I do a nasty little hack. When you open up Neovide on macOS, the
working directory is set to `/`. This is _very_ inconvenient, so I do this:

```lua
if vim.fn.has("gui_running") == 1 then
  vim.cmd.cd(vim.fn.environ()["HOME"])
end
```

This change your workdir to your home dir when you run Neovim inside the GUI.
This exact code may need some tweaks (for example, when you start your GUI from
the terminal), but it works just fine for my use case.

[neovim]: https://neovim.io/
[neovide]: https://neovide.dev/
[templ]: https://templ.guide/
[doom]: https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs
[hx]: https://helix-editor.com/
[zed]: https://zed.dev/ne
[nyan]: https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/8575-nyan-progress-bar
